---
title: "Professional Self-Assessment (Read First)"
date: 2020-08-16
tags: [computer science, strengths, software design, algorithms, data structures, databases]
header:
  image: "/images/el-capitan.jpg"
excerpt: "Computer Science, Strengths, Software Design, Algorithms, Data Structures, Databases"
---

<h3><p align="center">Professional Self-Assessment</p></h3>

My name is Jack Whipple, and for the last two years I have been diligently learning the art of computer science from Southern New Hampshire University in order to prepare me for a new career in this highly technical field. During my time in the Computer Science program I have gone from knowing very little about computer science to understanding and implementing computer science concepts and best practices. All of the course work I have completed in this program has allowed me to gain valuable foundational skills on multiple programming languages, and understanding how to write and develop functioning programs from something as simple as printing “Hello World!” with a few lines of code to a program more complex that utilizes multiple data structures and algorithms to produce programs that can be seen within this ePortfolio. The coursework from this program and the ePortfolio I developed for my capstone course has really excited me to work in this industry and has helped shaped my career interests in working specifically with databases. Using my new skills in Linux, MySQL for relational databases, or MongoDB for NoSQL databases I was able to design and manipulate databases through Create, Read, Update, Delete (CRUD) operations, and perform queries to search for specific information contained within a database.

Other skills that I already had but was able to improve through this program included working in a team environment and communicating with superiors and stakeholders. During one class I had to work collaboratively with other students to develop a jukebox program in a team environment, and that really helped me to better understand the software development lifecycle software testing, and working in separate branches prior to merging with the main branch of a program. In every course, and especially in this ePortfolio, I was required to explain my work as if I was addressing co-workers or different stakeholders. This was a valuable skill to improve and enhance as it gives me the ability to effectively communicate with different people on the work I am creating, how it works, and how it can benefit a company or its users. It also demonstrates that I understand the concepts of computer science beyond just writing and developing code. This summary served as an introduction to the different skills and strengths I developed while in my Computer Science program. In the next section I will specifically address the artifacts contained within my ePortfolio and how (as a whole) they demonstrate the full range of my computer science talents and abilities.

##### ePortfolio Artifacts
The artifacts contained within this ePortfolio are designed to show my abilities in three main areas of computer science, software design/engineering, algorithms and data structures, and databases. While these three artifacts are separate programs, together they show I have a strong foundational base in computer science in which I can continue to grow and develop my skills. The first artifact I created for this ePortfolio was my software design/engineering artifact. The original program was written in Python and was used to control a program that would take in light data to determine if the program should continue to run or not, and if it did then it would take a temperature and humidity reading of the surrounding air environment. For this artifact I decided to enhance it by transferring the program from Python to Java. Both versions of the program take in both analog and digital inputs from a light sensor and digital temperature sensor, and then produces both analog and digital outputs in the form of color changing LEDs based on current temperature conditions and a terminal screen output displaying the current time, temperature, and humidity level. The artifact also shows my ability to understand that different languages use different syntaxes and data structures. Python is a pretty simple and straight forward language, but when I transferred the program to Java I had to use a lot more class methods that were called upon later in the program in order to get the same result from my program rather it was run in Python or Java.

The second artifact included in this ePortfolio was my algorithms and data structures artifact. The program I chose to include demonstrates my ability to store data in different data structures and then manipulate the data with various algorithms. Specifically, the program uses methods in JavaScript to store data for the pictures and text used for each slide of the slideshow, and then algorithms are used to display that data in JPanels and CardLayouts. The slideshow also uses buttons to move forwards and backwards through the slideshow. In the artifact enhancement I added complexity to the program by increasing the number of slides presented in the slideshow and by adding a new button that takes a user to the website of slide they are on.

Finally, the third artifact included in this ePortfolio is my databases artifact. The program I chose used basic MySQL commands to create, read, update, and delete data from a database used in one of the classes from my program. This program shows the ability to alter tables in order to add new fields, insert data into an existing table, to delete data from a table, and create new tables with a primary key and different fields to house data. The enhancements made to this program include adding MySQL views and MySQL full-text search. By adding advanced MySQL concepts, I have demonstrated that I can take a database and perform advanced operations in order to improve the efficiency of the database and make it better for end users. These artifacts are separate but combine to show the different skills and abilities I have learned and acquired while in the Computer Science program. Following this self-assessment are the three artifacts and their respective narrative that describe the enhancement process I went through to make the artifact worthy of inclusion to this ePortfolio, and how the artifact demonstrates course outcomes.
